chore(blog): article proposal based on basic concepts about APIs (#1134)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/a_straight_guide_to_apis_and_architecture_concepts.md

---
title: "A straight guide to APIs and architecture concepts"
subtitle: From a newcomer experience
date: 2022-11-29T06:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - APIs
  - Architectures
cover: /img/posts/a_straight_guide_to_APIs_and_architecture_concepts/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Barbaño González
    photo: /img/avatars/barbano.webp
    link: https://www.linkedin.com/in/barbano-gonzalez-moreno

> excerpt: Basic concepts about APIs and architectures for beginners and non-developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: Basic concepts about APIs and architectures for beginners and non-developers.
featured: true
```

so it will show up on top

 
### Types of APIs? 

We can classify them into two main groups, depending on their use or their type of architecture.

#### Types of APIs according to their use:
 
- **Internal APIs** are those used at a local level. They focus on communicating with each other within the same system or the same computer. An excellent example of them might be the pipes contained in a house. They connect the sink to the bathroom and the washing machine to the dryer, for example.
 
- **External APIs**, or web APIs, are those used to communicate two or more applications over the Internet. We could exemplify it with the pipes that connect different houses in the same block of apartments or neighborhoods.

- **Partner APIs** are a middle ground between internal and external APIs. This is because they are accessible to people outside the organization but only to those with exclusive permissions. Typically, this special access is granted to certain third parties to facilitate collaboration. 

  A good example might be when we invite friends over, and they bring their controllers to play the game console. Or when a friend comes over and connects to our wifi network.

> #### According to its **architectural style**: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### According to its architectural style: 
```

bold will not render in TOC and will show asterix

![Screenshot 2022-12-05 at 12 36 31](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6995927/205627893-c3fe4b49-2274-4963-a7e1-9490ff6f2858.png)

Reviewer: you probably should remove `:` too as it looks weird in TOC

---
title: "A straight guide to APIs and architecture concepts"
subtitle: From a newcomer experience
date: 2022-11-29T06:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - APIs
  - Architectures
cover: /img/posts/a_straight_guide_to_APIs_and_architecture_concepts/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Barbaño González
    photo: /img/avatars/barbano.webp
    link: https://www.linkedin.com/in/barbano-gonzalez-moreno
excerpt: Basic concepts about APIs and architectures for beginners and non-developers.
---

> It has not been such a long journey into the technology realm for me. Then I started to work at AsyncAPI, and suddenly, I needed to understand a complex world. New terms, codes, and ways of seeing things were waiting for me. Coming from other fields of knowledge, the challenge was huge. How to begin? How to have a clue?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It has not been such a long journey into the technology realm for me. Then I started to work at AsyncAPI, and suddenly, I needed to understand a complex world. New terms, code, and ways of seeing things were waiting for me. Coming from other fields of knowledge, the challenge was huge. How to begin? How to have a clue?
```

> I decided to start with the basics: trying to find a way to catch the meaning of some key ideas related to APIs. I read and reread over and over again definitions and more definitions. They were full of technical terms that, rather than bringing me closer to understanding the concepts, distanced me from them. I found myself diving into a deep and dark ocean. And I was too squared to flow in those turbulent currents. The alphabetical order is not a natural one. A dictionary for itself is not such a good tool for starting to know a language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I decided to start with the basics: trying to find a way to catch the meaning of some key ideas related to APIs. I read and reread over and over again definitions and more definitions. They were full of technical terms that distanced me from them rather than bringing me closer to understanding the concepts. I found myself diving into a deep and dark ocean. And I was too squared to flow in those turbulent currents. The alphabetical order is not a natural one. A dictionary is not a good tool for starting to know a language.
```

>  Then, I decided to change direction, looking for data. I thought that checking some visual and intelligible sources might clarify my head. So, I could understand where to put the information, helping me start weaving a tapestry. Nevertheless, not knowing the code made it difficult for me, if not impossible, to interpret rough data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Then, I decided to change direction, looking for data. I thought that checking some visual and intelligible sources might clarify my head. So I could understand where to put the information, helping me start weaving a tapestry. Nevertheless, not knowing the code made it difficult for me, if not impossible, to interpret rough data. 
```

 
So, let’s talk some basic concepts:
 
## APIS

### What is an API?

APIs are program connectors. Synchronous or asynchronous, they act as glue between different applications or programs. As cables or pipes connecting different locations to facilitate information exchange or optimize resources.
 
### How does an API work?
 
APIs act as an intercommunicator, linking one or more programs. Let's say they could be seen as a bridge between different places connecting them and transferring the required information through them. It’s a way to exchange data or give commands to each other.
 
### Types of APIs? 

We can classify them into two main groups, depending on their use or their type of architecture.

> #####Types of APIs according to their use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Types of APIs according to their use:
```

 
- **Internal APIs** are those used at a local level. They focus on communicating with each other within the same system or the same computer. An excellent example of them might be the pipes contained in a house. They connect the sink to the bathroom and the washing machine to the dryer, for example.
 
- **External APIs**, or web APIs, are those used to communicate two or more applications over the Internet. We could exemplify it with the pipes that connect different houses in the same block of apartments or neighborhoods.

- **Partner APIs** are a middle ground between internal and external APIs. This is because they are accessible to people outside the organization but only to those with exclusive permissions. Typically, this special access is granted to certain third parties to facilitate collaboration. 

  A good example might be when we invite friends over, and they bring their controllers to play the game console. Or when a friend comes over and connects to our wifi network.

> ##### According to its **architectural style**: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### According to its **architectural style**: 
```

> It is essential to choose the architecture style or pattern that best fits the desired use case for the API if specific functional capabilities are required. There are several architecture styles for APIs, as well as different data formats; the following are the most common: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is essential to choose the architecture style or pattern that best fits the desired use case for the API if specific functional capabilities are required. There are several architecture styles for APIs, as well as different data formats. The following are the most common: 
```

- **REST** (representational transfer state), this architecture style separates the needs of the API user from those of the provider, thanks to commands embedded in the underlying network protocol. For example, Twitter provides a REST API that you can query for the latest tweets.

> - **RPCs** (remote procedure calls), are styles that usually demands developers to perform specific code blocks on another system or different systems. RPCs are protocol-independent, making them potentially compatible with many protocols, although they do not include the benefits of using native protocol features. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **RPCs** (remote procedure calls), are styles that usually demand developers to perform specific code blocks on another system or different systems. RPCs are protocol-independent, making them potentially compatible with many protocols, although they do not include the benefits of using native protocol features. 
```

>   For example, the Network File System (NFS) plays an essential role in Unix and Linux. This system uses RPC between client and server to mount the set of files from a remote computer on a local computer, that is, to make them partially or entirely available on the latter, allowing the user to manage the files located on a remote device as if he had them on his computer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For example, the Network File System (NFS) plays an essential role in Unix and Linux. This system uses RPC between client and server to mount the set of files from a remote computer on a local computer, that is, to make them partially or entirely available on the latter, allowing the user to manage the files located on a remote device as if they had them on their computer.
```

Mujer, pero porqué `he`? 😄😂😂😂😂

Author: Ups, a not very convenient typo!!😅

> - **Event-driven**, real-time, asynchronous, do not wait for the API user to make the call before sending a response. The response is issued as soon as an event occurs.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Event-driven**, real-time, asynchronous, doesn't wait for the API user to make the call before sending a response. The response is issued as soon as an event occurs.  
```

  A simple example is when you enter a page on the Internet, the browser makes a request to a server, and the server responds with the content you have requested.
 
## Architectures 

Now that we have seen the classification of APIs, let's focus on the most representative types of architecture. 

In my opinion, this is the most interesting part. Understanding different construction models bring us closer to the skeleton of the system. By understanding this part, we can better sustain the concepts of APIs, supporting them on fundamental pillars.

-  **Monolithic architecture**

> Monolithic architecture describes a kind of construction made from a single piece of material, historically from rock, A standing stone. Indivisible. As a menhir, the simplest megalithic monument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Monolithic architecture describes a kind of construction made from a single piece of material, historically from a rock, a standing stone. Indivisible. As a menhir, the simplest megalithic monument.
```

The same goes for the traditional structure of software applications. Monolithic is an end-to-end architecture in which all aspects of the software function as a single unit. 

-  **Microservices architecture**

> Microservices architecture is a method for developing software applications that consist of small, autonomous services. Each microservice's code can be written in a different language and perform specific functions.
> Microservices communicate with each other through APIs and have their own storage systems, which avoid overloading and crashing the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Microservices architecture is a method for developing software applications that consist of small, autonomous services. Each microservice's code can be written in a different language and perform specific functions. Microservices communicate with each other through APIs and have their own storage systems, which avoid overloading and crashing the application.
```

-  **Monolithic architecture**

Monolithic architecture describes a kind of construction made from a single piece of material, historically from a rock, a standing stone. Indivisible. As a menhir, the simplest megalithic monument.

<Figure
  src="/img/posts/a_straight_guide_to_apis_and_architecture_concepts/guide-pic._02.webp"
  widthClass="w-1/2 mr-4 float-right"
/>

The same goes for the traditional structure of software applications. Monolithic is an end-to-end architecture in which all aspects of the software function as a single unit. 

-  **Microservices architecture**

Microservices architecture is a method for developing software applications that consist of small, autonomous services. Each microservice's code can be written in a different language and perform specific functions. Microservices communicate with each other through APIs and have their own storage systems, which avoid overloading and crashing the application.

<Figure
  src="/img/posts/a_straight_guide_to_apis_and_architecture_concepts/guide-pic._03.webp"
  widthClass="w-1/2 mr-4 float-left"
/>

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

this extra character causes the issue with font collor

---
title: "A straight guide to APIs and architecture concepts"
subtitle: From a newcomer experience

> date: 2023-01-12T06:00:00+01:00

Reviewer: please set next Tuesday as @AceTheCreator article was completed first and we will release it today or tomorrow

Author: Yes, of course. There is no rush 🙂
